---
title: "Personality traits modulate temporal dynamics and cross-system coordination of acute stress responses in virtual reality"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2026.107834
excerpt: 'Acute stress is a primary risk factor for mental disorders. While prior virtual reality (VR) studies have utilized
objective physiological measures to address biological heterogeneity, the specific temporal evolution and cross-system coordination 
of these responses remain less explored. To address this gap, we developed a multi-scenario virtual reality (VR) stress paradigm, 
and analyzed personality modulation of stress response dynamics in 44 healthy adults via high-density 
monitoring (continuous heart rate/heart rate variability/galvanic skin response;9-timepoint cortisol sampling). 
Personality traits significantly modulated temporal trajectories (15/28 time ×trait interactions p adj <0.10) 
but poorly predicted peak intensity (3/36 regressions significant), suggesting personality primarily influences 
"how responses evolve" rather than "how strong." Psychoticism and trait anxiety predicted autonomic desynchronization, particularly
sympathetic-parasympathetic decoupling during recovery (β =0.339 h, p adj =0.031). These findings advance a paradigm shift from "reactivity"
to "regulatory capacity" in stress research, providing a scalable digital tool for individualized stress susceptibility
assessment.'
date: 2026-03-16
venue: 'Psychoneuroendocrinology'
citation: 'Xu, H., Huang, J., Gou, M., Qi, S., An, H., Tan, K., ... & Tan, S. (2026). Personality Traits Modulate Temporal Dynamics and Cross-System Coordination of Acute Stress Responses in Virtual Reality. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 107834.'
---
The contents above will be part of a list of publications, if the user clicks the link for the publication than the contents of section will be rendered as a full page, allowing you to provide more information about the paper for the reader. When publications are displayed as a single page, the contents of the above "citation" field will automatically be included below this section in a smaller font.
